UNIT 1:Sets, Relations and FunctionsSets and their Representations, Union, intersection and complements of sets, and their algebraic properties, Relations, equivalence relations, mappings, one-one, into and onto mappings, composition of mappings. UNIT 2:Complex NumbersComplex numbers in the form a+ib and their representation in a plane. Argand diagram. Algebra of complex numbers, Modulus and Argument (or amplitude) of a complex number, square root of a complex number. Cube roots of unity, triangle inequality. UNIT 3:Matrices and DeterminantsDeterminants and matrices of order two and three, properties of determinants, Evaluation of determinants. Area of triangles using determinants, Addition and multiplication of matrices, adjoint and inverse of matrix. Test of consistency and solution of simultaneous linear equations using determinants and matricesUNIT 4:Quadratic EquationsQuadratic equations in real and complex number system and their solutions. Relation between roots and co-efficients, nature of roots, formation of quadratic equations with given roots; Symmetric functions of roots, equations reducible to quadratic equations Œ application to practical problemsUNIT 5:Permutations and CombinationsFundamental principle of counting; Permutation as an arrangement and combination as selection, Meaning of P(n,r) and C(n,r). Simple applications.UNIT 6:Mathematical Induction and Its ApplicationsUNIT 7:Binomial Theorem and its ApplicationsBinomial Theorem for a positive integral index; general term and middle term; Binomial Theorem for any index. Properties of Binomial Co-efficients. Simple applications for approximations.T.C.No: 5/1703/30, Kowdiar Gardens, Golf Links Road,Housing Board Colony, Thiruvananthapuram,: 0471-2438271, 09387814438, www.mathiit.com
UNIT 8:Sequences and SeriesArithmetic, Geometric and Harmonic progressions. Insertion of Arithmetic Geometric and Harmonic means between two given numbers. Relation between 23 . Arithmetico-Geometric Series, Exponential and Logarithmic series. UNIT 9:Differential CalculusPolynomials, rational, trigonometric, logarithmic and exponential functions, Inverse functions. Graphs of simple functions. Limits, Continuity; differentiation of the sum, difference, product and quotient of two functions. differentiation of trigonometric, inverse trigonometric, logarithmic, exponential, composite and implicit functions; derivatives of order upto two. Applications of derivatives: Rate of change of quantities, monotonic - increasing and decreasing functions, Maxima and minima of functions of one variable, tangents and normals, Rolle™s and Lagrange™s Mean Value Theorems.UNIT 10:Integral CalculusIntegral as an anti-derivative. Fundamental integrals involving algebraic, trigonometric, exponential and logarithmic functions. Integration by substitution, by parts and by partial fractions. Integration using trigonometric identities. Integral as limit of a sum. Properties of definite integrals. Evaluation of definite integrals; Determining areas of the regions bounded by simple curves. UNIT 11:Differential EquationsOrdinary differential equations, their order and degree. Formation of differential equations. Solution of differential equations by the method of separation of variables. Solution of homogeneous and linear differential equations, and those of the typed2y/dx2 = f(x)UNIT 12:Two dimensional GeometryRecall of Cartesian system of rectangular co-ordinates in a plane, distance formula, area of a triangle, condition for the collinearity of three points and section formula, centroid and in-centre of a triangle, locus and its equation, translation of axes, slope of a line, parallel and perpendicular lines, intercepts of a line on the coordinate axes. 
The straight line and pair of straight linesVarious forms of equations of a line, intersection of lines, angles between two lines, conditions for concurrence of three lines, distance of a point from a line Equations of internal and external bisectors of angles between two lines, coordinates of centroid, orthocentre and circumcentre of a triangle, equation of family of lines passing through the point of intersection of two lines, homogeneous equation of second degree in x and y, angle between pair of lines through the origin, combined equation of the bisectors of the angles between a pair of lines, condition for the general second degree equation to represent a pair of lines, point of intersection and angle between two lines. Circles and Family of Circles Standard form of equation of a circle, general form of the equation of a circle, its radius and centre, equation of a circle in the parametric form, equation of a circle when the end points of a diameter are given, points of intersection of a line and a circle with the centre at the origin and condition for a line to be tangent to the circle, length of the tangent, equation of the tangent, equation of a family of circles through the intersection of two circles, condition for two intersecting circles to be orthogonal.Conic Sections Sections of cones, equations of conic sections (parabola, ellipse and hyperbola) in standard forms, condition for y = mx + c to be a tangent and point(s) of tangency.UNIT 13:Three Dimensional GeometryCoordinates of a point in space, distance between two points; Section formula, direction ratios and direction cosines, angle between two intersecting lines. Skew lines, the shortest distance between them and its equation. Equations of a line and a plane in different forms; intersection of a line and a plane, coplanar lines, equation of a sphere, its centre and radius. Diameter form of the equation of a sphere.UNIT 14:Vector AlgebraVectors and Scalars, addition of vectors, components of a vector in two dimensions and three dimensional space, scalar and vector products, scalar and vector triple product. Application of vectors to plane geometry.UNIT 15:Measures of Central Tendency and DispersionCalculation of Mean, median and mode of grouped and ungrouped data. Calculation of standard deviation, variance and mean deviation for grouped and ungrouped data. 
UNIT 16:ProbabilityProbability of an event, addition and multiplication theorems of probability and their applications; Conditional probability; Bayes™ Theorem, Probability distribution of a random variate; Binomial and Poisson distributions and their properties. UNIT 17:TrigonometryTrigonometrical identities and equations. Inverse trigonometric functions and their properties. Properties of triangles, including centroid, incentre, circum-centre and orthocentre, solution of triangles. Heights and Distances UNIT 18:StaticsIntroduction, basic concepts and basic laws of mechanics, force, resultant of forces acting at a point, parallelogram law of forces, resolved parts of a force, Equilibrium of a particle under three concurrent forces, triangle law of forces and its converse, Lami™s theorem and its converse, Two parallel forces, like and unlike parallel forces, couple and its moment.UNIT 19:DynamicsSpeed and velocity, average speed, instantaneous speed, acceleration and retardation, resultant of two velocities. Motion of a particle along a line, moving with constant acceleration. Motion under gravity. Laws of motion, Projectile motion. 
