UNIT 1:UNITS AND MEASUREMENTUnits for measurement, system of units Œ S.I., fundamental and derived units. Dimensions and their applications.UNIT 2:DESCRIPTION OF MOTION IN ONE DIMENSIONMotion in a straight line, uniform and non-uniform motion, their graphical representation. Uniformly accelerated motion, and its applicationsUNIT 3:DESCRIPTION OF MOTION IN TWO AND THREE DIMENSIONSScalars and vectors, vector addition, a real number, zero vector and its properties. Resolution of vectors. Scalar and vector products, uniform circular motion and its applications projectile motion.UNIT 4:LAWS OF MOTIONForce and inertia Œ Newton ™s Laws of Motion. Conservation of linear momentum and its applications, rocket propulsion, friction Œ laws of frictionUNIT 5WORK, ENERGY AND POWERConcept of work, energy and power. Energy Œ kinetic and potential. Conservation of energy and its applications, Elastic collisions in one and two dimensions.Different forms of energy.UNIT 6:ROTATIONAL MOTION AND MOMENT OF INERTIACentre of mass of a two-particle system. Centre of mass of a rigid body, general motion of a rigid body, nature of rotational motion, torque, angular momentum, its conservation and applications. Moment of Inertia, parallel and perpendicular axes theorem, expression of moment of inertia for ring, disc and sphere.UNIT 7:GRAVITATIONAcceleration due to gravity, one and two-dimensional motion under gravity.Universal law of gravitation, variation in the acceleration due to gravity of the earth. Planetary motion, Kepler™s laws, artificial satellite Œ geostationary satellite, gravitational potential energy near the surface of earth, gravitational potential and escape velocityUNIT 8:SOLIDS AND FLUIDSInter-atomic and Inter-molecular forces, states of matter. (A) Solids : Elastic properties, Hook™s law, Young™s modulus, bulk modulus, modulus of rigidity. (B) Liquids : Cohesion and adhesion. Surface energy and surface tension. Flow of fluids, Bernoulli™s theorem and its applications. Viscosity, Stoke™s Law, terminal velocity.
UNIT 9:OSCILLATIONSPeriodic motion, simple harmonic motion and its equation of motion, energy in S.H.M., Oscillations of a spring and simple pendulum.UNIT 10: WAVESspeed of a wave, longitudinal and transverse waves, superposition of waves, progressive and standing waves, free and forced Oscillations, resonance, vibration of strings and air-columns, beats, Doppler effect.UNIT 11:HEAT AND THERMODYNAMICSThermal expansion of solids, liquids and gases and their specific heats, Relationship between Cp and Cv for gases, first law of thermodynamics, thermodynamic processes. Second law of thermodynamics, Carnot cycle, efficiency of heat engines.UNIT 12:TRANSFERENCE OF HEATModes of transference of heat. Thermal conductivity. Black body radiations, Kirchoff™s Law, Wien™s law, Stefan™s law of radiation and Newton™s law of cooling.UNIT 13:ELECTROSTATICSElectric charge Œ its unit and conservation, Coulomb™s law, dielectric constant, electric field, lines of force, field due to dipole and its behaviour in a uniform electric field, electric flux, Gauss™s theorem and its applications. Electric potential, potential due to a point charge. Conductors and insulators, distribution of charge on conductors. Capacitance, parallel plate capacitor, combination of capacitors, energy of capacitor.UNIT 14:CURRENT ELECTRICITYElectric current and its unit, sources of energy, cells- primary and secondary, grouping of cells resistance of different materials, temperature dependence, specific resistivity, Ohm™s law, Kirchoff™s law, series and parallel circuits. Wheatstone Bridge with their applications and potentiometer with their applications.UNIT 15:THERMAL AND CHEMICAL EFFECTS OF CURRENTSHeating effects of current, electric power, simple concept of thermo-electricity ŒSeeback effect and thermocouple, Chemical effect of current Œ Faraday™s laws of electrolysis.
UNIT 16:MAGNETIC EFFECTS OF CURRENTSOersted™s experiment, Bio-Savart™s law, magnetic field due to straight wire, circular loop and solenoid, force on a moving charge in a uniform magnetic field (Lorentz force), forces and torques on currents in a magnetic field, force between two current carrying wires, moving coil galvanometer and conversion to ammeter and voltmeter.UNIT 17:MAGNETOSTATICSBar magnet, magnetic field, lines of force, torque on a bar magnet in a magnetic field, earth™s magnetic field, para, dia and ferro magnetism, magnetic induction, magnetic susceptibility.UNIT 18:ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION AND ALTERNATING CURRENTSInduced e.m.f., Faraday™s Law, Lenz™s Law, Self and Mutual Inductance, alternating currents, impedance and reactance, power In a.c. Circuits with L.C. And R Series Combination, resonant circuits. Transformer and A.C. generator.UNIT 19:RAY OPTICSReflection and refraction of light at plane and curved surfaces, total internal reflection, optical fibre; deviation and dispersion of light by a prism; Lens formula, magnification and resolving power; microscope and telescope.UNIT 20:WAVE OPTICSWave nature of light; Interference Œ Young™s double slit experiment. Diffraction -diffraction due to a single slit. Elementary idea of polarization.UNIT 21:ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVESElectromagnetic waves and their characteristics, Electromagnetic wave spectrum from gamma to radio waves Œ propagation of EM waves in atmosphere.UNIT 22:ELECTRON AND PHOTONSCharge on an electron, e/m for an electron, photoelectric effect and Einstein™s equation of photoelectric effect.UNIT 23:ATOMS, MOLECULES AND NUCLEIAlpha - particles scattering experiment, Atomic masses, size of the nucleus; radioactivity; Alpha, beta and gamma particles/ rays and their properties, radioactive decay law, half life and mean life of radio-active nuclei, binding energy, mass energy relationship, nuclear fission and nuclear fusion.UNIT 24:SOLIDS AND SEMI-CONDUCTORS DEVICESEnergy bands in solids, conductors, insulators and semi-conductors, p-n junction, diodes, diode as rectifier, transistor action, transistor as an amplifier. 
